I'm a staff engineer, staff software engineer at GitHub and promise
I know how to use computers.
I'm an app proto enthusiast, why I'm here, and
also a member of the chronically online and really, really love
online communities.
I work remote and so online communities is really how I engage
with a lot of folks and so that's what I got
really interested in.
I co-host the Overcommitted podcast.
I'm going to be recording this weekend.
If you want to talk about your experience here, let me know
because we're going to do a special episode.
And I also brought some stickers that I'll put out once
I find where all of the stickers are congregating.
So a few months ago, I had this thought that I thought
was a brilliant idea.
I was like, why isn't there a Goodreads or
like a letterbox on at proto?
This does not exist yet.
And so I started building this app called Collective which was
sort of, you know, the same thing.
Turns out it did exist.
And there's quite a few of them.
One of them in particular that I really like is called pop
feed.
social.
They did this way, way better than I had done.
And I highly recommend you check it out if you're interested
in something like that.
But one thing that I got really stumped by while working
on this problem was I have an online developer community for Over
committed.
And we have a book club.
So we like to read technical books together.
If you are also interested in reading books, let me know.
You're welcome to join.
Right now we coordinate on Discord.
And Discord is great, but I really wanted Collective to help,
you know, facilitate the book club situation.
Because it's really awkward to say, all right, we're going
to put our list on GitHub and then we're going to
have the conversations in Discord and then we'll have some events.
And it's just, it's kind of a mess.
So I was like, you know what, wouldn't it be nice
if we could solve this problem?
Discord now owns our member list.
It owns our reading history.
It owns every single conversation we've had about every single book.
If Discord decides to change their terms, which I'm sure they
would never do, then we lose all of that.
The entire history of our entire community can just be erased.
And that's a real bummer.
It's not necessarily just a Discord problem.
This is also a platform problem.
Every single group that has been built online on Reddit or on
Facebook or on Slack, the platform owns every one of those spaces
and the platform gets to make all of the decisions about what
happens there.
And when the platform disappears, that means the community disappears too.
You've got Google Plus, MySpace, Twitter, what once existed of
it, all gone.
Along with every single conversation and every shared memory and piece of
community knowledge.
So I think that AppRoto did a really great job
of solving personal ownership.
Your posts live in your repo.
Your social graph is completely under your control.
And your identity is portable to wherever you want to bring it.
But there's still an open question one.
Question about what about shared things?
So what about book clubs?
Or community projects?
Or the group chat itself?
Does that belong to the individual or does it belong to the
group as a whole?
So these are the design questions that I was thinking about going
into this.
Because I wanted to build something that would make it so that
my group could live not just in collective itself, not just on
blue sky where we chat to each other.
I want it to exist on its own and not be controlled
by whichever platform we are working in.
So the first question was where does the data live?
Is this a shared PDS?
Is it someone's personal repo?
Whoever created the group?
We'll get into that.
That can be problematic.
Yep.
Somebody is familiar with this problem.
And then who controls it?
Like does the person who created the group get automatic full control
over that group forever?
No.
Absolutely not.
Like that's crazy.
Because then, you know, anyway, we'll get into that.
And then how do members themselves relate to the group?
Do they have to sign up through whatever group mechanism they're
in?
What determines how a group, how an individual controls their own affili
ation with the group?
And so those are the things that I brought into thinking on
this problem.
And I do want to give some shout outs to a ton
of folks in the community that have already been thinking a lot
about this.
And that their work has gone into what I ended up building.
So Brian Newbold, I just met you this morning.
Sorry, I'm stalking you online.
But he had some great, great leaflets on this.
Nick Jerakines.
I don't think he's in here, but I technically work
with him as how he's been introducing me today.
We work at GitHub together and I've been bugging him.
He's had some great stuff.
I have Mary, the front page team.
Erland, who I don't believe is here.
And then also I wanted to give a shout out to Amelia
who has been very patient at answering all of my questions here.
Yes.
So I've been collecting these and I built a thing with
that.
So AppRoto's philosophy is really your data, your repo.
That works for personal data but not so great for shared state.
It doesn't really fit neatly into this one person's repo.
So how do we extend that ownership model to collective data without
losing what it is that makes AppRoto so special?
And this is the approach that I came up with which is
open social.
community.
It isn't really the answer, but it's an answer.
And, you know, you can try it out and see if this
is a thing that fits you or built your own thing.
That's the beauty of this community.
It's group infrastructure.
It's not itself an app view.
It's just an infrastructure and a set of APIs that anybody
can integrate with, any app you can integrate with, or any community
can manage their own group through.
And I'm going to walk through a couple of the design
decisions that were made.
So the first one, which is the most important to that ownership
question, is groups are stored as AppRoto identities themselves.
They're their own did.
I've separated the group infrastructure from the app because I don
't want to get into the situation where I've built this
fantastic community and then the app goes in a direction that I
don't agree with and then we're just completely locked in.
Membership is a two-way handshake.
Not anybody can just join any group.
I mean, maybe there are some groups who are okay with that,
but there's definitely some that aren't.
And you can't just say, hey, I'm going to join
this group now.
And then, finally, there's a wrapper pattern to have shared content
that makes it easy to show within an app view without necessarily
overloading that repo with a lot of extra stuff.
So what does that look like?
Every group gets its own did.
So, for example, my book club is its own web, did web
over committed.
dev.
It has its own handle, its own repo on a PDS
and then group shared data is stored within that repo.
That makes a group a first-class citizen of the protocol itself
and it means that it gets to take advantage of a lot
of the stuff that's already built there.
It's not a row in some apps database.
It's an entity with its own identity.
And just like personal dids, that entity is, at least, hopefully,
portable.
And then the infrastructure, instead of being an app view itself, this
is what the infrastructure looks like.
So I can have collective, which is, has access to open social
community.
But then you can also have your own other apps that have
access to it.
Any app view can connect to it.
And you can also have, you know, your podcast app or your
reading app or multiple of those if you want.
Maybe you want to multiple, you want to support blue sky and
black sky and Erosky, all from the same thing, to
have one group, then that's totally reasonable.
Each app gets its own namespace within open social.
So collective stores app.
collectivesocial.
group.
list lexicons.
And then other apps cannot create other lexicons within the
group unless they have access to those namespaces.
That prevents other apps from overriding data that, you know,
you don't want somebody else to be able to change the
data for your podcast app from collective or vice versa.
Same group, different data and no conflicts.
The group there is the shared context then.
And then the group gets a decision on which apps it also
has access to.
So if an app does go in a direction that the group
decides that they don't want access to, they can also prevent
that group from having access or that app from having access to
that group.
The next one.
So membership as a two-way handshake.
This means that there is a membership record in an individual's
repo and then also in the group repo.
That confirms that not only has the member agreed that they want
to be involved in this group, but the group has agreed that
that person is involved in that membership record.
That means that an individual can leave any time without needing permission
from the group to leave the group.
And then at the same time, the group can, you know, ex
communicate somebody if needed without having to get permission to update
that individual's repo.
And that's a nice opportunity for privacy here, too.
So you can have a group of membership records that, you know,
have hashes that are storing instead of the actual membership identity,
which means that then you don't necessarily have a list of
all the people that are in the group sitting in the repo,
which can also be beneficial.
And then the wrapper pattern.
So in this case, this is for user content.
So the group creates a wrapper around that content.
Bob, in this case, will own the book review.
They create the book review and they own that content.
But then the group owns a wrap or wrapper around that content.
That means that the group has access to remove that content from
the group if needed.
And then Bob, if he decides to leave the group, he still
owns his own book review, which is nice.
Then the group repo also ends up being an index of references
and not necessarily a copy of all of the content, which can
also be a bit problematic.
And then this is what it looks like end-to-end.
So you register an app, in this case collective, as an app
view with OpenSocial.
Community and get an API key which can be used for
authentication.
And then you can create your group through those collective APIs.
I'm still working on some PDS things involved to make
that simpler because nobody wants to have to create a did and
then put it over anywhere else.
But we'll get to that.
Members join through that two-way handshake, which, again, can be
within the app view if you'd like or through OpenSo
cial.
Community.
It has its own UI for that.
And then members contribute content via their wrappers, also through APIs.
They support community creation, membership management, namespace, record storage.
Because I work in the enterprise space at GitHub, there's also
audit logging and custom roles and permissions, which were probably a little
bit unnecessary.
But it's what I know.
And because I don't want to just talk about it, I
'm going to show you a little demo through images.
So this is what it actually looks like on the web.
Both OpenSocial and Collective are up.
Like I said, don't use Collective.
It's not very good.
But OpenSocial is up.
And I've spent a lot more time looking at this.
So this is how you can register a developer app.
You can go in and initially set, like, what are the le
xicons that you want groups to be able to manage.
And you can say, with the regular create, read, update, or delete,
do you want everybody in the group to be able to do
that or just group members?
So you can have a completely open one or say, like, eh,
let's say that only admins can delete things or something.
Next, you can view the group itself.
The list of members.
You can search through it.
See who has registered with this group.
And also have different community settings.
So community admin can configure settings like whether the community is completely
open.
Anybody can join.
Whether they want it to be closed where they need approval.
Or whether it's private but asterisk on private.
Because everything's in a repo in app proto.
So private doesn't really exist just yet.
But it will.
There's some very smart people working on that problem.
These governance decisions are explicit and visible.
They're not buried.
They're just all stored within the group's repo.
And then finally, there's app permissions.
So a community admin can say, I want access to this app
but not this one within this group context.
And theoretically, there's also some opportunity here to create some sort
of a record now saying this is where this group has access
to.
Maybe we can just create, like, a Steam or Roblox
type app store where you can access all of these different apps.
You can access collective or blue sky or black sky or stream
place.
All within one space.
And you can say these are the places that my community is
gathering.
So that it's easy to gather across different contexts.
And then finally, collective.
So you have the ability to discover new communities.
Search for them and view them.
Each community has its own handle.
Membership status.
You can see here, we've got overcommitted.
dev, which is the overcommitted book club, which I already
have access to.
And then a few of the book club features on collective.
Because why would I build just one app when I could build
two?
Is what the overcommitted group actually looks like.
So it has a collection of lists of different books, including the
book that we're currently reading.
And an ability to set different sections by date.
An ability to comment on different sections of the book.
And an ability to make sure that you're not spoiling
those things so that you complete the book reading before you actually
participate in the discussion.
This is the most recent book that we read, Writing for Develop
ers.
Cynthia Dunlap and Peter Sarna are both very active
on Blue Sky.
And I highly recommend you check out the book if you are
in the very small niche of developers who also like to write
for other people.
And then, yeah, so the full app is available at opensocial.
community.
If you're interested in building on it, let me know.
Because I would love to see how this actually scales across other
apps.
Like I said, there's a lot of features that are built
in already that are probably overkill.
But -- And then we also have collective social, which I think is
mostly just for book club organization.
But we also have some movies and some other ways to collect
podcasts and things like that.
So yeah, that one is in alpha, I will say, as a
way of saying it's not quite ready.
But what about -- so this brings me to some important points about
groups.
So specifically about governance and moderation.
So one of the things that Brian brought up in one of
his posts brought to my attention is from Nathan Schneider, who
coined the term implicit feudalism, which is a very large
way of saying that there's a default pattern where whoever creates
a thing online typically ends up owning that thing.
And I think that that goes in multiple ways.
That's not just the group itself.
It's the platform that actually allows the creation of the group.
So by default, there is a bias towards building communities as f
iefdoms, where somebody owns that group.
And they want to, of course, increase membership and be the person
who owns that community.
But that doesn't -- that means that that person has absolute power
over the group.
And a member needs to start seeking permission to be able to
do anything, which is something that I've experienced a lot in
community spaces.
It would be really nice if we did this thing, but then
they need to get permission from the person who runs the community
to actually do that instead of just doing the thing.
So what shared groups on AppProto can enable for us
is we can have different governance patterns.
What does that actually look like when we have control over it
separate from the platform?
We have an ability to make that completely transparent where the rules
are visible for everybody and that you can create rules that fit
your community because it's not a one-size-fits-all approach
here.
Different communities are going to want different ways of managing themselves.
And so we want to be able to make sure that it
's flexible enough that they can do what they want to do
across all of the different apps.
And then moderation is the other spot that I've been looking
at this from, which is a layered moderation approach that is already
built in.
This is a thing that already exists with labelers.
And the group itself can act as its own labeler.
Admins can approve labelers that align with the community values
and then we can layer on that by moderating within the
specific spaces that they're in.
And then individual members can still add their own labelers or
muting or anything like that on top of that so that
they see exactly the stuff that they want to see and nothing
else.
The advantage here for using this wrapper pattern means that there's
an implicit moderation built into the group itself.
You can remove a wrapper and that content is hidden from the
community.
But the user's data is still intact.
You can remove a membership proof and that revokes access without
actually destroying the rest of the access to the group.
You can delete content which leaves a tombstone preserving conversation structure.
And then there's options there for, you know, appealing those moderation
decisions.
You can, you know, maybe just soft delete those things and then
bring them back so that they can be appealed easily.
There's still a lot to figure out.
I think that private groups is probably the thing that I'm
most interested in.
It's important not just, you know, because not every group needs
to be available.
What if it's just your friend's group chat?
You know, that doesn't necessarily need to have everything visible online,
but it's also important for community safety.
I participate in a lot of parenting groups online because I am
a mom of three young kids and none of us want pictures
of our kids shared on the internet.
So having that privacy is extremely important.
Group creation.
I've been talking to Bailey a little bit about that today,
where there are some really awesome ideas on how to make this
easy because you don't want to necessarily tell somebody, all right,
if you want to have your own community, first set up a
PDS.
Like, that's not the way to sell anything to anybody.
So making that easy and frictionless when a user's using
it is very critical.
And then finally, how do we make this interoperable?
Not just with app proto, but what about the activity pub?
Like, why would the decentralized communities need to be separated?
We can bring them together within their own identity.
So why are groups important?
What becomes possible?
So then this means that the whole reason why this is important
is the playlist that somebody creates on Spotify that's owned by
the friend group that's not necessarily owned by Spotify itself.
A study group can have their own shared notes belonging to students.
Discussion forums can stay with the author and not with the
individual or not with the group, the platform.
I think that decentralization is not just about personal data sovereignty,
but it's also about collective data sovereignty.
A community's shared knowledge and history and spaces should belong to
the community forever, not just while they're on the platform that
they're on.
So the question, the answer to who owns the group chat, the
group should.
I'd love to talk more about this if this is a
thing that you're interested in.
I've got some resources linked here.
You're welcome to check out and I've also got some
links to all of these community references.
I'll post this, I guess, maybe in Discord and Roomie
chat.
I've got a repo for all of this.
Symbol.
Okay.
Yeah, we'll put it somewhere on the internet and you'll
be able to access it.
We're going to keep the 15
minute offset if you want to take a few questions.
Oh god.
Any questions?
Oh, yeah.
I think I'm not, I'm very interested to see what
comes out.
Oh, yes.
Thoughts on private groups.
I think that that data should not be stored in a PD
S.
I'm very excited to see what happens with a lot of
the permissioned data and what comes out of that to see
what that forms.
It's not a thing that I've spent a lot of
time doing, but it's a thing that I definitely want.
The question was when you
are setting roles, can you set custom roles?
And the answer is yes.
You can set custom roles with different permissions that are set up.
And you can define what permissions as an app view provider of
which ones should be created.
It's very complicated.
Honestly, it's probably overcomplicated.
But yes, that is, that does exist.
Thanks.
So theoretically also custom role names.
Custom, oh yes, for sure.
Custom role names.
There's some defaults, member and admin.
And then from there, the world is your oyster.
Yes.
So the question was about identity and the different
roles.
Yes.
So the question was about identity and the different roles.
Is there any roles?
Oh, verification of the individual.
Oh, oh, interesting.
We believe handles are real people.
That's true.
I'm a firm believer that like a handle is like pretty,
if you own, I own BrittanyEllec.
com and there's nobody else that can really take that without
having access to my DNS, which is a different problem.
Um, but, uh, yeah, I don't really have strong opinions, though,
on like verifying individuals.
I think that that could probably be the, something that the group
decides how they want to handle it.
Awesome.
Thank you very much for taking a few questions.
Yeah.